---
layout: post
title: Marching for women and so much more in Madagascar
date: 2019-01-19 01:00:00 +0300
description:  # Add post description (optional)
img: MadaWomensMarch.jpg # Add image post (optional)
tags: [womens march, madagascar] # add tag
link:
---
It’s January 19, 2019, and the sun glints brightly off the bold blue of our matching T-shirts. Some two hundred people gather on the roadside just outside of Ranomafana National Park in south-central Madagascar, here to participate in the world’s first-ever Women’s March Madagascar—organized by my friend and colleague, Elizabeth Toomey, the co-founder of Mahaliana, a Madagascar-based biological research laboratory that opened in 2018. I march along with Liz, a smattering of fellow biologists, local officials, and a few dozen Malagasy and American students from the statistics and modeling workshop that I lead every January in the region, E2M2: Ecological and Epidemiological Modeling in Madagascar. We walk together in testament to our dedication to making this world a more equitable place.
Almost exactly two years ago to this day, on January 21, 2017,  I joined 600,000 people in Washington D.C. and over seven million people worldwide to walk against hatred and bigotry and in honor of equal rights and kindness for all. It was a day I will never forget. I was, at the time, a fifth year PhD student in Princeton University’s Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, studying zoonotic (or animal-borne) viruses infecting fruit bats in Madagascar. I carried a sign that read simply, “I believe in science”, and  I remember how one curious onlooker turned to face me in the crowd asking, with evident incredulity, “Are you a scientist?” 
Yes, indeed, it turns out. We come in all sorts of shapes and sizes, races and genders.
 I’m now a postdoctoral fellow with the Miller Institute at the University of California, Berkeley, and I still spend upwards on four months every year, chasing down bat viruses—and teaching students—in Madagascar. The inauguration of the Women’s March on the Eighth Continent, in conjunction with our annual E2M2 workshop, reflects a bit of home that we’ve brought along to Ranomafana. My Malagasy colleagues caution that the concept of ‘peace marches’ is not well understood in Madagascar—where public demonstrations are often associated with violence. And for this reason—hoping to remain as positive and innocuous as possible—I carry no sign this year. But I clap my hands and raise my voice with my comrades in song, and I feel my chest tighten with elation and emotion.
A rainstorm breaks overhead as our marching crowd surges into a hotel lobby on the outskirts of Ranomafana town. We huddle in the steaming dining hall to listen to speeches and cheer our fellows. Liz stands up and speaks in clear and confident Malagasy, explaining the global concept of the Women’s March to her spellbound audience. In certain regions of Madagascar, she tells us, antiquated laws prohibit women from inheriting property. In other regions, the custom of Moletry allows parents to trade their young daughters to older men in marriage in exchange for oxen or money. Historically, a child born to a foreign woman and a Malagasy man was born a citizen of Madagascar—but not so the child born to a Malagasy woman and a foreign man. That law changed in 2016—a sign of forward progress, but so much more remands to be done. 
“It’s just not fair, says Liz, “and we’ve got to change that.” And here in Madagascar—a nation that celebrates International Women’s Day, the eighth of March with characteristic exuberance every year—the audience understands and nods their agreement. 
I stand to speak—in English for our foreign guests, mixed with Malagasy phrases for emphasis—and I find that my fingers shake with emotion but my voice comes out level. I highlight the challenges faced by Malagasy women and men alike who aspire to pursue careers in science. In the absence of educational stipends and guidance in pursuing grants and fellowships, careers like my own are unjustifiable for most and impossible for many on this island nation. For me, I say, the Women’s March is about being fair. The Women’s March acknowledges that, as it is, the world is a very unfair place, and by marching, we affirm our commitment to trying to change that. And so I march as a promise to do my best to make the world a better place—for my nieces and nephew in America and for our E2M2 students, mentors, and even instructors in Madagascar.
I smile proudly as I note that in our third consecutive year of teaching E2M2, two-thirds of our student body and four-fifths of our mentoring team is female. But the fight for equality—for both women and men alike—is far from over. I remember how, two years ago, in the midst of the Women’s March on Washington, my thoughts turned to my science colleagues in Madagascar, who daily face more daunting challenges than my own. I feel sambatra—blessed—to have been born in a country where freedom of expression is such a prized and fundamental human right. 
I peer out at the sea of bright young women—and men—around me, and I feel hopeful that such fundamentals are close on the horizon for Madagascar, too. In the words of a wise US Senator and onetime Secretary of State, I tell my young friends solemnly, “Ataovy ao an-tsaina fa matanjaka, sy misy lanja ary tena ilàna ianareo. Ary koa mendrika ary manan-jo ny hahazo izay zavatsoa sy fahafahana misy amin'ny fiainana inareo.”
“Never doubt that you are valuable and powerful and deserving of every chance and opportunity in the world.” 
