---
layout: post
title: A new face to my Madagascar
date: 2019-05-28 01:00:00 +0300
description:  # Add post description (optional)
img: ekipa_fanihy.jpg # Add image post (optional)
tags: [madagascar] # add tag
link: 
---
It’s late fall on the Eighth Continent, and night falls early and fast, bringing a chill that years of experience tells me will soon seep across the land. But for the moment, the days are warm, dry, and golden—the afternoon light perfect in every way. On principle, I worship sunshine, and on the verge of the Malagasy ririnina—the winter—the sun shines brightest of all.

It’s the last day in my briefest visit to Madagascar to date—a mere three-week stint spent almost entirely holed up in the laboratories of Institut Pasteur de Madagascar in the island nation’s capital city of Antananarivo. I’m here largely to spearhead an exciting new development in our ever-growing study of zoonotic viruses derived from wild Madagascar fruit bats. We’ve just received funding from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to bring the first-ever Next Generation Sequencing technology to Madagascar, and I’m preparing RNA samples for export and sequencing—in part with a training of Malagasy scientists scheduled to take place in the laboratories of Chan Zuckerberg Biohub in San Francisco later this July.

But for one blissful day, I’ve managed to escape my laboratory obligations and join ‘Ekipa Fanihy’ – Malagasy for Team Fruit Bat – in the field. As a PhD student in the Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology at Princeton University, I pioneered a longitudinal field study, tracking viral and immunodynamics in wild populations of Malagasy fruit bats. Along with my close colleague, Christian Ranaivoson, I spent months of my life trekking and busing intrepidly across Madagascar—bat nets and liquid nitrogen in tow, amassing a freezer full of valuable samples awaiting scientific inquiry. Now a postdoctoral fellow with the Miller Institute for Basic Research at UC Berkeley, I find myself stepping back from the field work to dive into the freezer, passing the baton of continued data collection to a younger generation: Angelo Andrianiaina and Fifi Ravelomanantsoa, Malagasy PhD students in Animal Biodiversity at the University of Antananarivo, and Anecia Gentles and Kimberly Rivera, American field coordinators recently graduated from bachelor’s programs and bound for graduate school in ecology in the future.

It’s a strange thing: growing up. It tends to sneak up without one’s notice, bringing new triumphs and new challenges and many unexpected joys. I left Madagascar the last time a mere nine weeks ago—in March 2019—when Ekipa Fanihy was still nervous and new to the ritual field biology of my project. Already, I return to discover that they’ve thoroughly claimed this work as their own. “Mahay be ny ankizy,” Christian and I agree – The kids know well – chuckling at our ever-advancing ages and responsibilities. Lately, I feel strongly the pull of my new role as Principal Investigator, project leader, and scientific advisor. I derive my greatest joy from watching Team Fruit Bat grow—technically, intellectually, and emotionally—replacing a former satisfcation in personal field skill and accomplishment. My heart brims with pride as Anecia draws up a syringe full of Rousettus madagascariensis blood, as Kim shows off pictures from her most recent adventures in scientific and cultural outreach: women-in-science leadership hikes in Tana and yoga lessons for little girls in the countryside. I clap my hands In delight when Angelo shyly relates that he’s been awarded a grant to cover expenses for the upcoming conference of the Association for Tropical Biology and Conservation and won’t be needing my funding help after all, and I gape in awestruck silence when Fifi tells me that she’s decided not to head north to a work on another project offer this June and July—she’d rather stay with us.

They are a friendly, joyous, inspiring bunch—Ekipa Fanihy—and I feel inexorably grateful for their diligence and relentlessly humbled to have played some small part in developing this team into a reality. Kim, Anecia, and I clamber into an overcrowded Tana taxibe—the public bus system—to venture downtown for dinner, and I think to myself, how well they have learned. It’s a rare thing for foreigners to ride public buses in Madagascar, but Ekipa Fanihy does so with grace and confidence and maturity. And as we sit at a table, beaming through our still field-stained faces, introducing Angelo and Fifi to their first foray into Indian food, I can’t help but remember the perfect glint of the afternoon sublight and think to myself that so many things about Madagascar speak to all that is good and right in this world.
 
